new-post: reana-0.9.0 (#33)
reanahub/blog.reana.io: content/posts/2023/reana-0.9.0.md

---
title: "REANA 0.9.0 is released"
date: 2023-01-24T09:00:00+01:00
---

We are happy to announce REANA 0.9.0, a major update that allows
users to set custom workflow retention rules to automatically delete workspace
files, adds a new way of launching workflows from external sources, and more!

<!--more-->

## What's new for the users?

### Automatically delete workspace files using custom retention rules

It's helpful to have a way to automatically delete files in your workflow's
workspace that you don't need anymore. For example, if your workflow creates
large temporary files that take up a lot of space that consume your
[disk quota](https://docs.reana.io/advanced-usage/user-quotas), you may want to
get rid of them after a certain period of time. Therefore, we're introducing the
ability to set up custom rules for keeping or deleting files in your workspace.

> This can save you from having to manually delete them, which can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can save you from having to manually delete them, which can be a
```

time-consuming process.

![Retention rules in the web UI](/images/ui-retention-rules.png)

> Please see a dedicated blog post about [custom file retention rules](https://blog.reana.io/posts/2022/workspace-file-retention-rules/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please see a dedicated blog post about [custom file retention rules](/posts/2022/workspace-file-retention-rules/)
```

to learn more about this feature.

### Launching workflows from external sources using web interface

You can now easily run your analysis workflows from publicly accessible external
sources, like GitHub, GitLab, digital repositories like Zenodo or any website on
the web using the new REANA launcher page. You can host your workflows on a

> public location and be able to access and run the workflow on the REANA web site

Reviewer: ```suggestion
public location and be able to access and run them on REANA
```

without having to do any manual steps.

[![Launch home](/images/reana-0.9.0-launcher.png)](https://reana.cern.ch/launch)

> For more information about this new feature please check a dedicated blog post

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about this new feature please check the dedicated blog post
```

> about [launching workflows from external sources using web interface](https://blog.reana.io/posts/2022/launching-workflows).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
about [launching workflows from external sources using web interface](/posts/2022/launching-workflows).
```

### Rucio authentication for workflow jobs

[Rucio](https://rucio.cern.ch/) is a scientific data management system used in
LHC particle physics and related scientific domains. It provides access for
large volumes of data spread across facilities at multiple institutions.

If your workflow needs to use data that is managed by a Rucio system, you can
follow the documentation that describes the [Rucio authentication method](https://docs.reana.io/advanced-usage/access-control/rucio/)
to learn more about it.

### Kerberos authentication for workflow orchestration

Previously, you had to set up Kerberos authentication for each step of your

> workflow one at a time. Finally you can easily enable Kerberos authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
workflow, one at a time. You can now easily enable Kerberos authentication
```

for your entire workflow by adding just one line in the specification file. This

> makes it much more convenient and efficient.

Reviewer: I think we should briefly explain that this is also useful for accessing restricted resources during the workflow orchestration. What do you think? One sentence would be enough, and we can also link to the related blog post (not published yet, though).

Author: I've added one sentence to explain it, but haven't changed the link to the blog post yet, since it's not clear if we will merge it today or not. I will update it later once it's clear

### Configure custom TLS certificates

REANA 0.9.0 also improves the handling of TLS certificates.
Without additional configuration needed, a self-signed certificate lasting 90 days is automatically generated each time REANA is deployed or upgraded.
This is enough for development instances, but a valid certificate issued by a trusted Certificate Authority should be used for production deployments.

For this reason, it is possible to disable the generation of the default self-signed certificate by setting the `ingress.tls.self_signed_cert` Helm value to false.
You can then provide a custom TLS certificate by creating an appropriate Kubernetes TLS secret and by setting the `ingress.tls.secret_name` Helm value to the name of this newly-created secret.

See the documentation page about [configuring TLS certificates](https://docs.reana.io/administration/configuration/configuring-tls-certificates) to learn more about this.

### How to upgrade existing REANA 0.8 clusters

If you are a REANA cluster administrator and you would like to upgrade from

> REANA 0.8.0 to REANA 0.9.0, you can optionally define the new [Helm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
REANA 0.8.0 to REANA 0.9.0, you can proceed as follows.

First of all, you can optionally define the new [Helm
```

values](https://github.com/reanahub/reana/blob/0.9.0/helm/reana/README.md)
listed above in your Helm values file:

```console
$ vim myvalues.yaml
```

You can then use the [Helm diff plugin](https://github.com/databus23/helm-diff)
to inspect the forthcoming change and then perform the upgrade using the
standard Helm commands:

```console
$ helm repo update
$ helm diff upgrade reana reanahub/reana --version 0.9.0 --values myvalues.yaml
$ helm upgrade reana reanahub/reana --version 0.9.0 --values myvalues.yaml
```

This release introduces several database schema changes to support workflow
retention rules, launching workflows from external sources and introduces some small
improvements and fixes. We thus need to perform database schema upgrade by
following the dedicated [upgrade documentation](http://docs.reana.io/administration/deployment/upgrading-db/):

```console
$ kubectl exec -i -t deployment/reana-server -c rest-api -- reana-db alembic upgrade
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Context impl PostgresqlImpl.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Will assume transactional DDL.

> INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade c912d4f1e1cc -> ad93dae04483, Interactive sessions.
> INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade ad93dae04483 -> 4801b98f6408, Job started and finished times.
> INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade 4801b98f6408 -> f84e17bd6b18, Workflow complexity.
> INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade f84e17bd6b18 -> 6568d7cb6710, storing full workflow workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Not sure what is the difference here?

Reviewer: I thought of removing those lines, as people upgrading from 0.8.0 should have already applied those revisions

---
title: "REANA 0.9.0 is released"

> date: 2023-01-24T09:00:00+01:00

Reviewer 2: 2023-01-26

---

We are happy to announce REANA 0.9.0, a major update that allows
users to set custom workflow retention rules to automatically delete workspace
files, adds a new way of launching workflows from external sources, and more!

<!--more-->

## What's new for the users?

### Automatically delete workspace files using custom retention rules

> It's helpful to have a way to automatically delete files in your workflow's

Reviewer 2: It is helpful...

(more written-style than talk-style language)

workspace that you don't need anymore. For example, if your workflow creates
large temporary files that take up a lot of space that consume your
[disk quota](https://docs.reana.io/advanced-usage/user-quotas), you may want to

> get rid of them after a certain period of time. Therefore, we're introducing the

Reviewer 2: we're introducing -> we are introducing

(or simply "The new REANA 0.9.0 release introduces the ability...")

> ability to set up custom rules for keeping or deleting files in your workspace.

Reviewer 2: for keeping or deleting -> for automatic retention and deletion of files

(to introduce gently the feature name)

> This can save you from having to manually delete them, which can be a

Reviewer 2: I would remove the last phrase "This can save you..." because it ends with "time-consuming process" evoking negative feelings. Staying positive what we have introduced should be enough here. And, for more details, there is the dedicated blog post.

time-consuming process.

![Retention rules in the web UI](/images/ui-retention-rules.png)

> Please see the dedicated blog post about [custom file retention rules](/posts/2022/workspace-file-retention-rules/)

Reviewer 2: "custom workspace file retention rules" might be more descriptive as the link label.

to learn more about this feature.

### Launching workflows from external sources using web interface

> You can now easily run your analysis workflows from publicly accessible external

Reviewer 2: As of this REANA release, you can now easily run...

or

REANA 0.9.0 also allows you to easily run...

sources, like GitHub, GitLab, digital repositories like Zenodo or any website on

> the web using the new REANA launcher page. You can host your workflows on a

Reviewer 2: any website on the web -> any web site

(might be sufficient)

> public location and be able to access and run them on REANA without having to do

Reviewer 2: access and run -> launch

(to hint at the feature name, the importance being running/launching, not accessing)

> any manual steps.

Reviewer 2: any manual steps -> any manual commands in the terminal

(perhaps clearer?)

[![Launch home](/images/reana-0.9.0-launcher.png)](https://reana.cern.ch/launch)

For more information about this new feature please check the dedicated blog post
about [launching workflows from external sources using web interface](/posts/2022/launching-workflows/).

### Rucio authentication for workflow jobs

[Rucio](https://rucio.cern.ch/) is a scientific data management system used in
LHC particle physics and related scientific domains. It provides access for
large volumes of data spread across facilities at multiple institutions.

If your workflow needs to use data that is managed by a Rucio system, you can
follow the documentation that describes the [Rucio authentication method](https://docs.reana.io/advanced-usage/access-control/rucio/)

> to learn more about it.

Reviewer 2: It would be useful to print here a "screenshot" of the say Serial example or the Yadage example, so that people can more easily relate to what this brings.

(And we'll have a nice balance that each major feature is  accompanied by a paragraph and an illustrating screenshot.)

```
rule mystep:
  container:
    "docker://reana-env-rucioclient:1.0"
  resources:
    voms_proxy=True,
    rucio=True
  shell:
    "rucio get my_rucio_scope:my_rucio_file"
```

You can get the source for the example with highlighting of given lines from https://docs.reana.io/advanced-usage/access-control/rucio/

### Kerberos authentication for workflow orchestration

Previously, you had to set up Kerberos authentication for each step of your
workflow, one at a time. You can now easily enable Kerberos authentication
for your entire workflow by adding just one line in the specification file. This
makes it much more convenient and efficient. This technique is especially useful
for workflows that need to access files in restricted storage in multiple steps.

Please check our documentation about [enabling Kerberos support for an entire workflow](https://docs.reana.io/advanced-usage/access-control/kerberos/#setting-kerberos-requirement-for-whole-workflow)
to learn more about this feature.

### Notifications to inform when critical levels of quota usage is reached

> A new notifications feature has been added to REANA web interface to alert users

Reviewer 2: A new notification feature

(singular before joining two words)

when their [quota](https://docs.reana.io/advanced-usage/user-quotas) is
approaching or has reached its limit. This feature is intended to help users
stay within their allocated Disk space and CPU consumption limits and inform
them when deletion of unnecessary workflow runs should be performed in order to
liberate some resources.

![Quota notifications](/images/reana-0.9.0-notifications.png)

## What's new for the administrators?

### Configure global workspace retention rules

> Workspace retention rules are giving users the possibility to remove unwanted files from their workflows' workspaces.

Reviewer 2: unwanted -> unnecessary

> However, administrators can also define a global workspace file retention period, after which all the files that are not listed as inputs or outputs of a workflow will be deleted, regardless of user-defined workspace retention rules.

Reviewer 2: "regardless..." evoked a bit negative feelings. What about simply ending the phrase e.g. "will be deleted".  Or "will be deleted at the latest" or "... by default".

This can be achieved by setting the `workspaces.retention_rules.maximum_period` Helm value to the desired amount of retention days.
Please note that, by default, files are retained forever.

For more information about this, see the related documentation page about [configuring global workspace retention rules](https://docs.reana.io/administration/configuration/configuring-global-workspace-retention-rules).

### Configure an additional volume for infrastructure components

Up until now, REANA has used only one shared storage volume to store all the workflows' workspaces, together with the database's and message broker's data.

> This means that, if the shared storage became full, some of the REANA components would fail due to the lack of free disk space.

Reviewer 2: would fail -> could fail

> While this is still the default behaviour of REANA, now it is also possible to configure a second infrastructure storage volume that can be used to separate workflows' workspaces from the data stored by REANA's infrastructure components.

Reviewer 2: now it is also -> it is now also

> While this is still the default behaviour of REANA, now it is also possible to configure a second infrastructure storage volume that can be used to separate workflows' workspaces from the data stored by REANA's infrastructure components.

Reviewer 2: separate workflows's workspaces from... -> 

I would inverse the order, to better highlight we are "saving" infra volume.  So say something like

...to better separate the data stored by the REANA infrastructure components from the runtime data generated by user workflows.

If you are interested in this change, please see the documentation page about [configuring storage volumes](https://docs.reana.io/administration/configuration/configuring-storage-volumes).

### Configure scheduler requeue count for busy cluster situations

Under specific circumstances, for example when the REANA cluster is busy, it can happen that some workflows cannot be scheduled.
These workflows are then queued again so that REANA can retry scheduling them in the future.
However, workflows with high priority that are requeued many times can overwhelm the queue, preventing other workflows from being executed.

> To avoid this, REANA 0.9.0 introduces a limit on the number of scheduling retries of each workflow. This limit is set to 200 retries by default, but it can be customized with the `reana_server.environment.REANA_SCHEDULER_REQUEUE_COUNT` Helm value.

Reviewer 2: The formatting of the phrase looks funny on my machine:

![200-retries](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/517546/214850136-55d6d3a5-1428-4d6e-8553-1c190735ddb2.png)

Perhaps we can reformulate to "cut the phrase" at better places?  Or expand to say also about `REANA_SCHEDULER_REQUEUE_SLEEP` that people should configure together.

For example: This limit is set to 200 retries by default, after which is incoming workflow will be declared as impossible to schedule. The value of 200 retries can be customised with the .... Helm value. You may also want to customise the accompanying value REANA_SCHEDULER_REQUEUE_SLEEP defining time interval between retries.

(did not try how it looks, just jotted down some random phrases to try improving the line break)

Reviewer 2: BTW general remark: shall we show YAML snippets to demonstrate configuration examples for each advertised feature? 

OT1H, it might make the blog more "alive", as it were.
OTOH, we are more interested in explaining the user-facing features, not admin-facing features, so this might do.

### Configure custom TLS certificates

REANA 0.9.0 also improves the handling of TLS certificates.
Without additional configuration needed, a self-signed certificate lasting 90 days is automatically generated each time REANA is deployed or upgraded.
This is enough for development instances, but a valid certificate issued by a trusted Certificate Authority should be used for production deployments.

For this reason, it is possible to disable the generation of the default self-signed certificate by setting the `ingress.tls.self_signed_cert` Helm value to false.
You can then provide a custom TLS certificate by creating an appropriate Kubernetes TLS secret and by setting the `ingress.tls.secret_name` Helm value to the name of this newly-created secret.

See the documentation page about [configuring TLS certificates](https://docs.reana.io/administration/configuration/configuring-tls-certificates) to learn more about this.

### How to upgrade existing REANA 0.8 clusters

If you are a REANA cluster administrator and you would like to upgrade from

> REANA 0.8.0 to REANA 0.9.0, you can proceed as follows.

Reviewer 2: 0.8

 (since some people are upgrading for 0.8.1)

improvements and fixes. We thus need to perform database schema upgrade by
following the dedicated [upgrade documentation](http://docs.reana.io/administration/deployment/upgrading-db/):

```console
$ kubectl exec -i -t deployment/reana-server -c rest-api -- reana-db alembic upgrade
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Context impl PostgresqlImpl.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Will assume transactional DDL.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade c912d4f1e1cc -> ad93dae04483, Interactive sessions.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade ad93dae04483 -> 4801b98f6408, Job started and finished times.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade 4801b98f6408 -> f84e17bd6b18, Workflow complexity.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade f84e17bd6b18 -> 6568d7cb6710, storing full workflow workspace.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade 6568d7cb6710 -> d34f3905043c, Workflow launcher url.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade d34f3905043c -> b92fe567be5b, Retention rules.
INFO  [alembic.runtime.migration] Running upgrade b92fe567be5b -> 377cfbfccf75, Retention rules pending status.
```

## Further improvements and bug fixes

> REANA 0.9.0 release comes with other minor improvements and bug fixes. Please

Reviewer 2: REANA 0.9.0 release comes with many other improvements and bug fixes, representing close to one year of development. Please see the detailed...

## What's new for the administrators?

### Configure global workspace retention rules

Workspace retention rules are giving users the possibility to remove unwanted files from their workflows' workspaces.

> However, administrators can also define a global workspace file retention period, after which all the files that are not listed as inputs of outputs of a workflow will be deleted, regardless of user-defined workspace retention rules.

Author: Minor: `of outputs` -> `or outputs`

However, workflows with high priority that are requeued many times can overwhelm the queue, preventing other workflows from being executed.

To avoid this, REANA 0.9.0 introduces a limit on the number of scheduling retries of each workflow. This limit is set to 200 retries by default, but it can be customized with the `reana_server.environment.REANA_SCHEDULER_REQUEUE_COUNT` Helm value.

### Configure custom TLS certificates

REANA 0.9.0 also improves the handling of TLS certificates.
Without additional configuration needed, a self-signed certificate lasting 90 days is automatically generated each time REANA is deployed or upgraded.
This is enough for development instances, but a valid certificate issued by a trusted Certificate Authority should be used for production deployments.

For this reason, it is possible to disable the generation of the default self-signed certificate by setting the `ingress.tls.self_signed_cert` Helm value to false.
You can then provide a custom TLS certificate by creating an appropriate Kubernetes TLS secret and by setting the `ingress.tls.secret_name` Helm value to the name of this newly-created secret.

> See the documentation page about [configuring TLS certificates](https://docs.reana.io/administration/configuration/configuring-tls-certificates) for learn more about this.

Author: Minor: `for learn more` -> `to learn more`
